People talk about this K-shaped economy.
Is that real or is that a meme?
>> I absolutely believe so, but I think
that it's a little bit more nuanced.
>> Okay.
>> Um, and so, you know, one of the things
that we spotted late last year and we're
tracking into this year was that we
weren't the first to see that it was a
K-shaped economy, but a lot of people
were making the assumption that the
K-shaped economy was being driven by
income levels. But when we were looking
at the data at the time, we were seeing
that those that had were in sort of the
higher income level, in our case, that's
150,000 above. So that's not your, you
know, people who were running hedge
funds and, you know, um but still it's
it's the relatively better to do um
cohort. They were actually seeing the
highest year-over-year ines delinquency
rates at the time.
>> So we knew that, okay, hold on a second.
It isn't as simple as this. So you know
we spent a lot of time and so a lot of
banks and we kind of collaborated with
them to try to understand what's what's
really then the differentiator and then
what seemed to be really a part of this
is wealth.
>> So you know a lot of people don't
necessarily differentiate income and
wealth but they are separate. Um and so
you know when you're looking then at a
highinccome cohort at the time to try to
see like okay well which ones are doing
well which ones weren't home ownership
was the biggest differentiator because
they had a a bigger cushion something
they can rely on rely on and then
obviously other indicator other aspects
as well like stock ownership and and
small business ownership etc. But home
ownership is is the one that has the the
bigger effect because there's more
people in the US economy that own a home
than than let's say has a stock
portfolio.
Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLs podcast. I'm Joe Weisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway.
>> Tracy, I feel like I just do not have
any feel right now on like the state of
the consumer really. I mean, you hear
K-shaped economy, labor markets slowing
down, then it's like lowest layoffs in
years. You go outside, everything looks
booming. Like, I just have no feel,
right? I know consumer sentiment is
terrible, but consumer sentiment is
terrible for years and people keep
shopping. I have no sense of it right
now.
>> Well, consumer sentiment actually came
in higher than expected most recently.
True. Big surprise. But I was going to
say, are you not out shopping for
Christmas presents?
>> It's insane, right?
>> Yeah. There's a lot of people buying a
lot of stuff.
>> People buying a lot of stuff.
>> But I think this gets to the K-shaped
economy point, which is if you have a
cohort of wealthy people who are buying
more, it more than offsets the lower
income people who are buying less at
lower prices. So it's really hard to
tell.
>> It's really hard to tell. One thing that
um definitely feels different you know
if you look at aggregate u measures of
household balance sheets
>> like this is something that is very
different than sort of like pregrade
financial crisis the the the general
view is that the American consumer or
the American household has a very big
cushion. There is a lot of home equity
built up that is not a thin layer. Um,
obviously anyone with money and any sort
of um, you know, investment account has
done phenomenally well. We're recording
this December 12th. Yesterday, I think
the S&P 500 hit yet a new all-time high.
So, if you have any sort of home equity
buildup, if you have any sort of
investment, you are doing very well. On
the other hand, of course, people are
stretched from years of inflation. We
know that hiring has uh, slowed down. We
know that, you know, we see these
headlines, delinquencies for cars have
like shot up, but I've been seeing these
headlines for years. I don't totally
know what they mean or how apples to
apples they are with the past. I just
don't know. I just I'm very confused.
>> Yeah. You know what's really interesting
to me? just from a financial
perspective. If you look at some of the
bonds that were actually built on
consumer loans, uh the weakest ones are
now from the like 2020 to 2022 period.
>> Oh, was the So, see this is another
interesting element of measures like
delinquencies and why I sort of wonder
like how comparable they are because
okay, partly a delinquency measure is a
snapshot of a moment in time, right? a
snapshot of health, but it also
inherently reflects something in the
past because it reflects, you know, what
were lending standards at the time,
right? Exactly. And so it, you know,
>> and that was a period of low interest
rates, low interest rates. Everything
was booming and stuff. Yeah. Give money
to anyone. Anyway,
>> we need to get a better picture of
exactly what's going on. How stressed is
the consumer? How much do these
delinquencies just reflect the profleacy
of lenders during the boom times when
rates were nothing, etc. And uh yes, we
need to figure this out, especially
we're in the middle of shopping season
and all that stuff. So, I'm very excited
to say we really do have the perfect
guest. We're going to be speaking with
Ricard Bondo. He is the executive vice
president, chief strategy officer and
chief economist at Vantage Score, a
credit scoring company. Ricard, thank
you so much for coming on the podcast.
>> Thank you for having me. It's an honor.
What is Vantage Score, a US credit
scoring company? What do you do there?
>> So, we're the largest um credit scoring
company in the United States. Um and we
were founded almost 20 years ago by the
three credit bureaus, TransUnion,
Equifax, and Experian.
>> And we were sort of created um with a
very specific mission in mind to drive
greater competition and credit scoring.
Prior to us, there really wasn't a lot
of choice in this space. We're also
there to create sort of drive more
innovation and create the most
predictive scores um which was a big ask
from the banks at the time and also to
be able to expand access to millions to
enable everyone who really is creditw
worthy to be able to get access to
credit products.
>> You mentioned the banks just then. Can
you expound a little bit more on your
customer base?
>> Yes. So, you know, we used um obviously
the primary use case that most people
think about when it comes to credit
scores um is for lending, right? when
you know you're applying for a loan and
they want to evaluate whether or not
you're going to be able to perform on
that loan, they'll often pull your
credit score as part of that process.
But it's used in in many other stages as
well. So for instance, many people who
are applying to rent in a new apartment
building may also get asked for it when
you are um trying to get a utility bill.
>> Definitely in New York, you get asked
for it.
>> Yes, you certainly do. And utility
bills, telephones, anything that
involves a long-term commitment on
payments generally now you'll often get
asked to provide your credit score. So
just to explain further you were start
you were started by whom? 20 years ago.
>> Um we were a joint venture by Experian,
Equifax and TransUnion. The three
national credit reporting agencies.
>> I don't understand what's the difference
between these major companies that we've
all heard of that provide a credit score
etc. that they such founded you like
what do you do differently than them?
Well, so what they do is they're the
ones who who um collect all this data um
from lenders and others on your credit
performance, right? So they're called
credit bureaus. They collect that.
They're highly regulated. But then most
lenders can't just make sense of all of
that data on its own. They need some
guidance to help to translate that into
what does that mean? Right? And so
that's where a scoring algorithm comes
into effect, right? And so the scoring
algorithm helps to take in all these
hundreds of different factors about you
to try to then determine what does that
mean about your propensity to pay.
>> Okay.
>> You mentioned predictive analysis as
well. What exactly is that? What's that
based on?
>> Well, so when credit scores are created,
right, the aim, the goal is to try to
evaluate what is the likelihood that
somebody's going to um default on a
payment over the next 24 months. So when
you see that score the score is actually
a translation of a probability right or
an odds right uh to evaluate what is
that risk
>> and how did we end up with the system of
FICO scores in the US because it has
like an interesting history.
>> Well you know um back in the day fair
Isaac um you know they created the first
sort of known credit score. They were
the first ones to realize that you know
there was a
>> is that what the FI and Farah Isaac is
that FICO is in fair oh okay
>> yes
>> didn't know it keep going
>> let's go back a bit right so in the old
days it you know lending was not
necessarily the most fair system that
there was right you know they may want
to call up your previous employer they
may call your landlord they may just ask
around and if they don't know anything
about you know there was a lot of
judgment involved in lending
>> a lot of racial discrimination as well
>> well there certainly was built into that
system, right? And so, um, then there
was a law created, the Fair Credit
Reporting Act that said like you can't
do that. You need a, you know, a a
better system that is fair, um, and that
is is a better quantitative ability to
assess people's risk, right? And that
created then this um need to be able to
consolidate all this quantitative
information in a way that lenders could
easily use it. So, you know, FICO was
the first fair Isaac at the time was the
first to create that um, and they did
very well doing so. Um but you know then
there was a need for um competition,
innovation and there was a lot of
frustration around the time of 20 years
ago that there was only one game in town
and and it all and it didn't score about
20% of the US population. It still
doesn't
>> and so and then a lot of lenders were
felt frustrated like like if it doesn't
work for 20% of the population there's a
problem we need something different and
so then the bureaus took the unusual
step of actually coming together to
create an alternative and that became
Vantage School.
>> Interesting. Can I as a consumer go uh
credit score shopping?
>> So the um first of all, there's
different ways to to use it, right? So a
lender will typically choose the credit
score that they're going to use for
being able to um underwrite a loan with
you. And often, you know, they'll use
many more factors than just a simple
credit score, right? Particularly the
more sophisticated ones.
>> Um however, when you're trying to
understand what your situation is, you
can there lots of different places you
can go. You can either go to the credit
bureaus, you can go to the likes of
credit karma. There are many different
services out there.
>> But I can't force the lender to look at
a specific look at this.
>> Yeah. Look at this one over here. It's
great.
>> Get a second opinion.
>> No, I'm afraid not. Um that's not how it
works. It's it's really, you know, the
lenders try to determine what is the
most appropriate score for their product
and and different and there are many
many different scores out there. There
scores that are in some cases built
specifically for types of products like
order loans and there other scores that
like our scores that are generic that
can be used for any type of product.
What do you do? So you collect more data
and you mentioned that there is this
wide swath of the population that
doesn't that wasn't being captured by
the credit bureaus. What do you do
additionally on top of them to expand
the pool, find potentially creditw
worthy borrowers that the uh that the uh
that they had been missing before?
Um so you know the the the thing is that
um the quality and the types of data
that's been collected by our credit
bureaus has improved significantly over
time.
>> Okay.
>> Um and so when we started creating our
algorithms we're you know the current
version that's now being adopted for
mortgage is the version four. We're
releasing version five this year. Um we
obviously we actually go and rewrite the
whole thing each time so that each time
we can come up with the most accurate
way based on the current data available
and our current ability to understand
how consumers are behaving because that
behavior changes over time. Um um you
know other companies what they've done
is they built a model a long time ago.
They don't like to necessarily reveal to
everybody how it works the secret source
right. So when you're seeing there's a
chief risk officer um and there's a new
model coming along either you want to
understand that it's going to behave
very similarly to the previous one to be
okay with it or you need a lot of
transparency in how it works so you can
get comfort in this new model. So I
think there's the big divergence in
strategy. We go back to boots and redo
everything from scratch each time, but
in the same time provide an awful lot of
transparency and a lot of tools so that
lenders can get a really good
understanding of exactly how this is
going to work and how it's going to
behave in different situations and they
can test it out, right? Whereas the
other one is still working with many
limitations that have been in place
since the very first models. And because
of those limitations, that's a big
difference in why um we score a lot more
people. So I'll give you a very concrete
example. So for instance, one of the
limitations that the others have is that
if you haven't had any credit activity
for the past 6 months
>> that you're not going to get a score.
>> So you can just imagine somebody that is
it works for the military deployed
overseas or anything else right. But the
good thing is you know starting about
you know 15 years ago the bureau started
collect and storing data so we could use
time series data because who'd have
thought that time series data could be
useful in prediction right completely
strange idea right so with with vin 4 we
started you using trended data time
series data and with that obviously we
can see back 24 months so yes if there's
a gap in six months of history it's
important but we're still able to see
what happened before then right and that
gets rid of you tens of millions of
people when you have that constraint.
There are other constraints in there,
too. So, people that are new to credit,
so if they haven't had a full six months
of history, again, they won't get
scored. Um, and then um if there aren't
any trade lines, they won't get scored,
right? And so, what we've been able to
do is to deal with those constraints in
a in a different way by a using time
series data, b using some other data
points. So, we were the first to use um
utility payments and rent. I mean, who
would have thought that your ability to
pay your rent could somehow again be
useful in trying to assess your your
risk, right? Um, and so, you know,
including those new types of different
types of data. Um, realizing that these
constraints can be changed now that you
have time series data. But then also,
guess what? You know, math has evolved
as well. Okay? And so you know what we
realized too was that you if you can be
really smart and use some new methods
like you know some AI methods for
instance like clustering to really
understand well look here's a group of
people and they behave in certain way
and by doing that in a better way we can
then figure out what is the best way to
measure this group of people here versus
this group of people here and doing that
well enables you to build much more
predictive scores and so that's an
important too that not a lot of people
always realize is that it's not one
formula that's calculating everybody's
score. Um you know people will get um
depending on what their credit file
looks like and their history looks like
they'll get divided into you know
different segments and then each segment
is scored according to that and that
again um increases the ability to score
people accurately and score more people
like in our case it's 33 million more
people that were able to score so it's
quite substantial. H how do the models
deal with upbreaks in previous consumer
patterns? Because we have seen um some
major ones in recent years. So after the
pandemic, we had phenomenal um a
phenomenally tight labor market and we
saw a lot of wage growth for lower
income. Um a lot of spending that was
sort of unprecedented in many ways. How
do models actually incorporate that sort
of big shift in the trend? So, I think
that's something really important to try
to understand and it's and it's not
easily understood by many. Uh, so give
me a second here. I'll try to break this
down.
>> Listen, are we have when people say,
"Give me a second. I have to break this
down."
>> Please break it down.
>> You can have a minute.
>> Yeah, you can have a minute.
>> Honestly, that's kind of what I enjoy
most about listening to your um podcast.
And so, look, the first thing to
understand is that this credit score is
not an absolute measure of risk.
>> It's a relative measure of risk. And let
me break that down for you. Right? So
what it means is that um um you know a
score if somebody has a score of 720 in
one month and then somebody else has a
score of 720 3 years later the risk will
be different. Um and the reason for that
is very deliberate. When we are
evaluating a person, right, because of
the laws of the Fair Credit Reporting
Act, right, we're allowed to look at the
things that are about you, but there are
things that are going out on at the same
time in the economy
>> that impact risk of the population as a
whole, right? So, that's why it's so
important when you're looking at things
like credit scores to understand when
was that score pulled, right? Because
the score of 720 in 2017 had a very
different characteristic. um of a score
of 720 in 2022. Okay. Now, but the thing
to bear in mind is it's it's an
excellent relative measure of risk. So,
at any one given point in time, you
know, somebody with a 720 is going to be
much better performing than somebody at
630. At the same time, somebody 840 is
going to be much better than both of
them. Okay? And that holds consistently
true. Um and so that's why it's very
important and still, you know, obviously
very important to include when you're
making lending decisions. But you know
lenders have to be thoughtful right they
they have to as they're making decisions
about you know how many people they want
to be able to underwrite and how to
think about risk they need to also start
thinking about these external factors as
well so that they can then you know set
their underwriting criteria to meet the
kind of level of risk that they're
willing to take on.
>> This makes I had never thought about
this but of course that makes so much
sense. So it's like I could have an
excellent credit history. I could have
exemployment, pay all my rent, but for
example, if the economy is going down
the tubes, I may still yet be a risky
credit because I may lose my job at some
point. And so this idea that it kind of
has to be relative because the
underlying conditions that affect
everyone are they're outside of our
control, but they are still important
from the perspective of the lender.
>> Exactly. And at the same time, you know,
if you get declined for a credit card,
you can't be told that the reason you're
getting declined is because unemployment
has hit 5%.
>> Okay?
>> Right? It it's that doesn't work. The
the laws are very specific. The reasons
for why you're not getting the top score
have to be explained and they have to be
based on on on attributes and data
obviously that are specific to you.
>> What's the most important external
factor when it comes to credit scoring?
because I've heard arguments for
obviously the labor market, the
unemployment rate, but also wage income
and therefore real disposable income.
How do you weight those different
factors?
>> I mean, I think if you're a lender, it's
going to really depend upon what types
of consumers you're lending to, right?
Um, and particularly now we're seeing
such divergence across consumers in
terms of who's doing well and who isn't.
Um, and so for instance, if if you are a
lender focused on people that are kind
of below prime, let's say that not
completely subprime, but that nearprime
group and and you're you know, you're
focusing on auto loans and you know,
you're in regions like Texas or in
certain areas, then obviously the
understanding the economic conditions
that are affecting those people like you
know a lot of those people would be
working in certain types of industries.
What is employment like in in those
types of industries, right? um or is it
people that are in the gig economy,
right? And so um it is quite nuanced.
It's not necessarily one thing and it's
going to depend. Whereas on the other
extreme, you know, if you're handing out
black cards and and your audience is
incredibly affluent, um then again, you
know, it's it's less about the risk
because at that point, your risk of
default is probably one in 10,000,
right? Um so they're they're just trying
to make, you know, sure that it is
absolutely risk-f free. Um
>> right. So someone in a highly cyclical
industry like I don't know truck drivers
in Texas or something that were taking
out auto loans would probably be seen as
riskier or the labor market would depend
more for them whereas if you're taking
out you know a black AMX card or
something like that probably real
disposable income.
>> Yeah. Okay.
>> Um so you mentioned different
segmentation is the uh people talk about
this K-shaped economy. Is that real or
is that a meme? I absolutely believe so,
but I think that it's a little bit more
nuanced.
>> Okay.
>> Um, and so, you know, one of the things
that we spotted late last year and were
tracking into this year was that we
weren't the first to see that it was a
K-shaped economy, but a lot of people
were making the assumption that the
K-shaped economy was being driven by
income levels. But when we were looking
at the data at the time, we were seeing
that those that had were in sort of the
higher income level, in our case, that's
150,000 above. So that's not your, you
know, people who are running hedge funds
and et, you know, um, but still it's
it's the relatively better to do um,
cohort.
>> They were actually seeing the highest
year-over-year increases in delinquency
rates at the time.
>> So we knew that, okay, hold on a second.
It isn't as simple as this. So, you
know, we spent a lot of time and sort of
a lot of banks and we kind of
collaborated with them to try to
understand what's what's really then the
differentiator and then what seemed to
be really a part of this is wealth. So,
you know, a lot of people don't
necessarily differentiate income and
wealth, but they are separate.
>> Um, and so, you know, when you're
looking then at a high income cohort at
the time to try to see like, okay, well,
which ones are doing well, which ones
weren't, home ownership was the biggest
differentiator because they had a a
bigger cushion, something they can rely
on, rely on. And then obviously other
indic aspects as well like stock
ownership and and small business
ownership, etc. But home ownership is is
the one that has the the bigger effect
because there's more people in the US
economy that own a home than than let's
say has a stock portfolio.
>> Right. Talk more about mortgage rates
because this feels pretty key when
you're talking about the K-shaped
economy, which is if anyone anyone who
bought their house before 2020 um is
probably a very lucky person and uh has
locked in a low mortgage rate. I think
mortgage rates are still even after the
rate cut were at like 6% or something
versus I think at one point they got
down to like 3% right after
>> people like 2 and a half%. Crazy. Yeah.
>> Yeah. And so if you bought a house then
you actually have this like massive
cushion as you put it versus someone
who's buying a house now or in the past
couple years.
>> In a way I see there's a bit of a silver
lining when it comes to housing. Right.
We we have seen rates come down this
week. um hopefully they will continue to
come down next year. There's a lot of
debate obviously even within the Federal
Reserve as to exactly the the speed at
which that's going to be accomplished
and obviously there are many other
factors that can impact that.
>> Um but I I the reason we see a silver
lining is is for two reasons. Okay, as
interest rates comes down obviously for
people that own homes that's their
biggest monthly payment. Um right now
there isn't much um point for many to
refinance given that where the interest
rates are. But if it comes down a bit
more there it'll be much more it'll make
much more sense for a large tranch of
homeowners that have higher interest
rates to be able to to make that switch.
So we'd expect a bit of a refinancing
boom as it hits a certain level. Um but
the other thing that's really exciting
about what's happening in the home
ownership space is that in um this year
um the FHFA changed the rules about um
uh what can be used what credit scores
can be used in mortgage. So historically
they've used a very old version um
that's from the '9s um of the classic
score um in in mortgage applications and
that was actually not deliberately done.
So it was just that it got written into
the rules and then since then um as a
recommendation but then it became kind
of the the deacto a monopoly um in in
that space. Um and the problem is that's
a model that um went through the last
crisis and the Federal Reserve of St.
Louis actually found that it uh it
didn't work well at all in that
situation. In fact, it saw a bigger rate
of increase in delinquencies amongst
those that were prime than it did
amongst those that were subprime. So the
rate of increase which is not how a
model's supposed to work. um
surprisingly right um and so um what's
happening now is that they're um they
have allowed for varnish score 4 to be
used and the reason I say that is that
it's a because as I mentioned before a
lot more people will now have the
ability to get access to home ownership
so that will create a bit more demand
>> okay
>> right which is great and the other thing
to think about too is who are these
people that um um that get access to
this right it's a lot of people that are
not not necessarily in the areas that
have been um have been so crazy with
house price increases, right? There are
a lot of rural communities like so if
you look at the state where there's the
biggest difference between scorable
people with the new score, it's actually
West Virginia
>> and so those economies could certainly
do really well from a change to more
people having home ownership. And then
the second thing too is obviously RMBBS
is really important. Uh had some
challenges back in 2008 2009, right? And
so having a better performance
>> challenges is a very modest way of
putting
>> I've heard about those challenges. I
think they came up a couple of times.
>> I was educated in the UK. Pardon me. We
have a tendency to understate things.
But um you know having a newer uh more
proven model, one that's you know worked
so well in credit card and other things
for the past eight years. It's become
the most used model in in many other
segments. So having a proven model
that's newer and more predictive should
help as well with reducing the systemic
risk in the R&Bs market.
>> Just be just to go back very quickly
because I don't it sounded important.
Can you just clarify a little bit more
what is this rule change such that could
unlock additional source of demand.
>> Okay. So, um, when you when a a bank
before wanted to submit loans to Fanny
May and Freddy Mack,
>> okay,
>> um, they could only submit those loans
using the FICO classic score.
>> Okay.
>> Okay. Which is actually two three
different scores. We go into that
another point, but anyway. Um, and and
there used to be like a cutoff that if
you didn't have 620, then you couldn't
um, be able to submit it. You could go
to an FHA FHA loan, but those are more
expensive, right? But you couldn't
necessarily get a a um a normal
conforming loan in the Ghost of Fame or
Freddy Mack. So that's now changed.
First of all, that minimum limit of FICO
has been removed and now um they are
just updating all the pipes to allow
them to use varnish score as a choice.
So now there'll be a choice. Lenders can
choose which score they want to to use
and they can make their own evaluations
about which one performs better.
>> Okay. So let's go back to uh starting at
the end of last year and you saw that
increase in delinquencies among fairly
um uh people with decent incomes maybe
they didn't have as much wealth. Talk to
us about the numbers. How big were these
numbers? How much did they catch people
by surprise? And what is the story there
about why there was this delinquency
pressure?
Well, so um
you know the good thing is it's evolved
a little bit since the end of last year,
but you know when we're looking at this
uh data then again look high income
earners not surprisingly have lower
delinquency rates than middle- inome
earners and that had themselves lower
delinquency rates than the lower income,
right? Um but not a lot of people were
looking at that kind of year-over-year
trend and the momentum, right? I'm
always looking at momentum because I'm
trying to get an early read on kind of
how things are developing.
>> Um and so at the time um you know we saw
actually let's go back a little bit
because I I think it can explain a
little bit more about what's going on in
the economy. Is that all right please?
So um when the pandemic happens right a
lot of stimulus comes in a lot of
forbearance programs are put in place
and as a result of that a so many
people's you know credit health um and
the way that they appear on on the
credit files improved dramatically as
they were they were paying down their
credit cards they were building up their
savings. It it was a it was a good
situation temporary but good. Um but
then you know 202122 starts creeping in
and we start seeing that oh okay this is
not a persistent situation. this was a
one-off, right? And we started seeing
delinquency rates starting to come up
again, right? What we saw, which
shouldn't be too surprising,
particularly given that that was when
inflation was kicking in uh in a in a
big way, was that those that were
initially impacted and who were showing
the biggest rises were the lower income
households, right? So, for the first
sort of, you know, 6 months, nine
months, that was the group that was
seeing the biggest year-over-year
increases. But then what we started
seeing was that you know come 2023
forward we actually started seeing that
um then the middle and higher income
households were starting being impacted
too. And that's probably related to the
fact that lower income households had
less um disposable or or or income but
they also had less savings put away so
that you know they're the first to feel
the pain. But then when there's this
consistent
imbalance between your inflows and your
outflows, right, you're gonna even if
you have, you know, 30,000 or 50,000
that's put away, that's going to start
depleting. And that's what we started
seeing happening even with these higher
income households because at the same
time, you know, they were hit by so many
pressures, right? Biggest rent increases
I think we'd ever seen came into, you
know, came into effect those few years
after COVID, right? We saw things on,
you know, car prices, the cost of auto
financing going up through the roof and
then various other things, v other costs
also went up substantially. And so, you
know, um it's not that higher income
people were immune from this, right?
Also, you know, as an economist, um, you
know, a lot of people always talk about,
hey, when inflation kicks in, it
disproportionately impacts lower-income
households because the cost of bread,
the cost of milk, etc., you know, it's
not like high-income people buy milk
that's 100 times more expensive, right?
But the reality is is if you look at
people's big outlays, right, many of
those actually scale with income. Rent,
for instance, people that earn more tend
to rent higher. um other big in um
outlays such as you know their um child
care, education and other things. They
also have been scaling more with income.
Now obviously there's a level of income
that you know that that does not apply
to but if we still talk about that
cohort 150 to 250 or so of of household
income, they're definitely seeing that
they they they felt the pain too. They
it took them longer before it started
impacting their delinquencies, but they
did start feeling the pain. The good
news though is um that as we started
looking at the second half of this year,
right? So we still saw those
delinquencies and high incomes rising
very heavily at the the beginning the
first half of this year, but since July
um and I've got data from October, so um
you know, of the three of the four
months since July, we've seen that
higher income households came down. So
that's a good sign. Um, and the reason I
say that's a good sign is not because
I'm a a fan of making the K-shaped
economy even more so um um um but the
fact that so much of the US economy is
driven by spending and you mentioned
earlier that high-income households
disproportionately impact um that and so
if that dries up that has a knock-on
effect on the whole economy. So to the
fact that we're seeing that cohort that
those delinquencies are starting to come
down I think there's some light at the
end of the tunnel. That reminds me
actually I always wondered um how useful
are big shopping events like Black
Friday or Christmas in terms of gauging
consumer sentiment. So you you always
see the headlines, you certainly saw
them this year, you know, record um
Black Friday spending, but then you also
see people break down that spending and
say, "Well, actually, it's because
everyone is so pressured, they really
need the low prices, so they're buying
everything now." How useful is something
like that to you?
you know, you can always see trends,
right? And so, you know, there from one
perspective, it's always good to look at
a number of different things such as
spending on Black Friday, Cyber Monday,
etc. because, you know, there are
nuances into how people have been
spending for those weekends over 20
years, but still, if you look at the
last three years, you can start to see
things that are happening. But the the
thing that, you know, I haven't been
able to get my head around is how much
of that in year-over-year increase in
spending and the holidays is driven by
the prices of the goods going up versus
people buying things that would have
traditionally been more expensive or
splurging more. That for me isn't
obvious. Um, and I think that again when
trying to understand how the economy is
going, it's so important if you're
looking at from a spending perspective
to actually look at the different
merchants, right? So, how's McDonald's
doing? What are the trends there? What's
happening in high-end? How is LVMH doing
versus, you know, um Walmart, etc. And
so, um because again, you know, even
though I said that, you know, there's a
silver lining in the high income, um
consumers are, you know, seeing
declines. middle income have come down,
but they're still increasing. And low
income are are staying persistently high
around 8% year-over-year increases um in
in their delinquency rates. And so,
again, there's we're probably next year
going to see more pe more households
struggling to make ends meet than we saw
this year. I still don't think that
there's, you know, um you know, just
looking at the trends going to be any
kind of major break point. But the thing
to bear in mind with that though is that
if you look at here this situation and
you look at for instance JP Morgan
published that you know the amount of
cash people have in their checking
accounts is coming down. So it just
means that there's
more of a challenge if there's a big
shock to the system at some point. Not
that I can foresee any shock to the
system but it's always something to be a
little bit wary of. Before we go on, I
want to go back to something you said
very quickly. You said, "Okay,
intuitively, people with higher incomes
are going to have delinquencies at a
lower rate than people with middle
incomes, and they're going to have uh
delinquencies at a lower rate than
people with lower incomes." That's not
intuitive to me, actually, because I
would also imagine that underwriting is
very different, etc. It's not obvious to
me why higher income people default less
than lower income people because I would
imagine lenders know their income and
they're going to have you know they're
going to scrutinize the loan of a lower
income person much more intensely etc.
So why why should this trend exist given
that they all don't they don't get they
don't don't get the same loan terms or
same loan availability.
No, they don't. And you know, a
high-income household will buy typically
more expensive than a car than a
low-income household will. Um but higher
income households tend to have more of
an ability to squirrel some money away
or they tend to have um other assets
that
>> but the lender knows that the lender
knows that the higher income uh
household is going to have likely more
savings and the lender knows that the
household that's in a very tight income
probably has very little uh cushion in
the form of what we call wealth. And so
why doesn't that just get baked into the
underwriting standards? Well, in in ways
it does, right? And so, you know, when
you're, you know, you're underwriting a
loan for, let's say, somebody who is
high income and has a good credit
history, your expectation of their
default is going to be incredibly low,
right? So, that's built into the pricing
and that's built into, you know, and you
obviously don't just look at a credit
score, you look at, you know, how what
their income is and various other
important metrics to be able to
determine the appropriate amount that
you will lend them, etc., right? Um but
um higher income consumers may not need
to take on as much debt as a proportion
to their income as lower income
households to make in you know to to get
through what they need to do right and
so if you look at
>> for instance um high-income household
how much of their um even though for
instance probably housing and um car
costs are some of the biggest outlays
they have proportionately they're
probably less than for lower inome
households right and so you know a lot
of it has to do with that
proportionality, but then also just that
again they will tend to have a bit more
reserves so that they can ride through
situations.
>> Um, talk to us about auto delinquencies.
Those have been rising and obviously
there's a lot of lending going on.
Again, Tracy mentioned the sort of 2028
to 2022 vintage car prices themselves
are going up. So, not only have the
rates gone up, but we've seen a
tremendous amount of auto inflation. So,
sort of stress at every level. we see
the numbers going up. What do those tell
us?
>> It's a fascinating story. Um you know
there's been a lot of interest um um
that was paid attention to auto loans
because you know suddenly in 2022
everybody started seeing these auto loan
delinquencies going up much faster than
other types of loan delinquencies. Um
and it was having a profound effect
obviously on auto lenders and and and
the economy as a whole. And you know
everybody's trying to explain well you
see we were got a bit too loose during
the period of COVID and other things and
they started adjusting their lending
criteria right so they did adjust their
lending criteria um around 2023 for most
of them but then we started we still saw
that despite that the delinquence rates
kept persistently increasing um and then
when we looked at the data we actually
saw that you know when you
they had actually had an impact by
adjusting their loan delay uh their
lending criteria. We saw that the
delinquency rates among subprime auto
lenders redu auto loans reduced quite
dramatically after that. So they did
have that effect but we saw that the
delinquency rates on near prime and
prime continued to go up and that was
what drove that increase.
>> And so we realized there's something
more going on here and also why is it
it's so different. So we went back a
long time. We went back to 2010 to try
to understand kind of what's been going
on. um because not many people look at
it from that time scale. But it's
actually quite fascinating because back
in 2010, auto had the best performance
of any loan product at the time. It was
the least risky. Um
>> this was always the narrative that
Americans will never give up their cars.
Even if they lose their job, they can
sleep in their car and live in the car,
which is very dystopian, but that's I I
remember hearing that story literally
from a banker, a banker who was actually
working on bundling phone loans, and he
was like the other thing, right? No one
will ever give up. No one will give up
their phone.
>> Yeah.
So you know so at that time it was you
know it was a it performed well right
and people did not default as much on
that as on other products but then we've
seen it has transitioned over that
15-year period to now you know being in
the first quarter this year it was the
riskiest credit product out there um and
it then subsequently student loans
started coming in um and that's another
story those delinquency rates are at
historic levels but on the auto loan
side we then tried understand what
what's causing this, right? And so what
we've seen was that um there's a number
of factors, some of them obvious, some
of them a little bit more subtle, right?
The average cost of a car has gone up an
incredible amount. And what we've seen
is then the average loan value for um
auto loans has increased more than any
other loan value. And that may sound
like, okay, but if you think about it,
mortgages tend to be the one that grows
the most because house prices have
appreciated so much over time. So the
fact that the average auto loan has
grown more than the average mortgage has
over that 15-year period is telling.
Okay. Secondly, obviously there is this,
you know, there's this double whammy. So
not only is the car more expensive, but
then more recently interest rates have
been higher, right? And so um, you know,
then I'm going to have to pay more, not
just for the principal, but also the
interest. But I think one of the things
that has caught many um consumers
offguard is okay, so they're in the
dealership, they're being shown some
numbers. Some people get it and they go
like, okay, yes, we can still do that.
We can make it work. We can just about
mix and stretch because also I think
people are trying to buy either the same
that they had before or slightly better,
right? Not many people like downgrading,
okay? And so they think, well, it's the
same car and yes, it's a little bit
more, but we can make ends meet, right?
um by looking at these numbers. But what
they often forget about is that
insurance has gone up significantly as
have just the cost of ownership, repair
costs have also um um gone up
substantially. And so when all those
things then hit them, they can be in a
situation where we just can't make it
work. Um and so um you know that's
that's not good. And you know the good
thing is of all the loan products,
mortgages are performing pretty well.
Okay, they are increasing but they're
still much much lower than they were
back in 2010. obviously much lower than
28 29. So, um but if you default on a
mortgage, it takes some time before
anything really happens, right? With an
auto loan, they they will come and they
will take that car away from you. And
given that, you know, so many people
rely on that car to go to their job, to
make their income, to, you know, to do
other tasks that are important like
their shopping or taking their children
to the the school or other things that
they need to do. people don't willingly
just default on on on these auto loans.
Um and so I think it is a sign that
correlates with the fact that you know
more households are struggling to make
ends meet.
>> Um how much insight do you have into
leverage? And the reason I ask is
because we've seen an explosion in buy
now pay later um programs. Virtually
every site you go to now has three
different options for getting a loan for
a small amount. And only a few of those,
my understanding is, are actually
reporting to the credit bureaus. So, and
I can also imagine if you're a lower
income person who is perhaps more
pressured, you're probably going to turn
to a family member and say something
like, "Hey, can you loan me, I don't
know, 500 bucks to make it to the end of
the month?" And there's no way that
credit scoring bureaus are going to have
insight into things like that. Informal
loans. there's, you know, the credit
data that comes from the credit bureaus
is still incredibly predictive and
useful, but it doesn't capture
everything. Um, like Alex was on, I
think recently a firm has is starting to
provision data to their credit file,
which is great, but there not all of
them are there.
>> Um, and so, you know, I think there is
still a lot that's not visible and that
is definitely of concern to lenders.
We've been hears about stacking and and
things of that nature. Um, obviously,
you know, these companies haven't got to
where they are without having some
understanding of risk themselves, right?
So, they're not going to necessarily
just let someone who's not performing a
loan take out another five BNPL loans,
right? And the ability of a consumer to
go to all the different BNPL providers
and use that. There's a level of effort
and sophistication required to do that.
There certainly, I'm sure they're going
to be some, but I don't know how many
people fall into that category.
Nevertheless, it is a concern that more
isn't visible. Um, and that's why I
think, you know, being able to pull in
more than credit file data such as cash
flow data becomes really important. And
so, what we've seen is that there more
and more um that are looking to
incorporate cash flow into the process
because then they can have a better
understanding of the ins and outs,
right? Is their checking balance um
going up or declining over time? You
know, are they is there does their
income look like it's stable? Does it
look like it's more sporadic? And so we
have started building now credit scores
that also incorporate that type of data
and that I think is going to become even
more important um as we go forward
because it there are going to be more
and more ways that consumers can borrow.
So that's probably the better way to get
that holistic view.
>> Just real quickly, auto delinquencies
are are they are they at their highest
level ever right now or close like what?
>> Yep. I mean they are. Yes. And so you
know and and they're continuing to to go
up. So what we have seen though is that
credit cards for instance they went up a
lot. So they went delinquencies yeah
delinquencies credit card delinquencies
went up um a lot in 23 24 but they've
started coming down and we started
seeing personal loans coming down as
well. So it's a very nuanced picture. So
we've seen the unsecurized
um uh delinquencies have started coming
down this year year-over-year but we're
still seeing mortgage and auto loans
continue that you know continue to
increase
>> which is pretty topsyturvy when you kind
of think about it. So the other thing
happening now is uh insurance rates
going up um because of the uh I guess
non-extension of previous subsidies. And
one thing you're seeing all over social
media is people posting their new
insurance rates for 2026. And I've seen
some crazy ones, you know, something
going from $600 to like $1,800
a month. How much pressure would you
expect something like that to exert on
the consumer for next year?
It's, you know, for many it's going to
be the straw that could break the
camel's back,
>> right? It's just, you know, particularly
if it's like car insurance can be a very
significant outlay for for many
households. Um, but you know, there's
other insurance for homeowners,
homeowner insurance is going up and
particularly if they're in areas like
California or Florida where you know,
natural disasters have led to, you know,
an increase in premiums above the
national average. And so, um, again,
look, I I I don't see that there's any
one thing that is going to cause a the
house to fall down, but at the same
time, just there's more and more
households where that that one
unexpected increase puts them in a in a
in a in a situation that's then makes it
impossible for them to make um their
their payments that month or for a
number of months.
um talk to us about the resumption of
student loan payments after I mean you
mentioned the importance of those not
only the stimulus but all that sort of
forbearance and so all this stuff the
one thing that just kept getting pushed
forever was the resumption of student
loans. How much when that when those
numbers turned back on or were those
payments turned back on how what kind of
uh impact did that have and what are we
seeing with student loan delinquencies?
>> Yeah, it had a very big impact. Um and
so you know if we look back before COVID
the average um student loan delinquency
rate was around that 10%. It was sort of
you know wavering around between 9 11%
in that sort of range. Um and then
obviously in this five-year period um of
of forbbearances and no reporting
because you had a a period of a year
between 24 and 20 um uh through 24 where
um they were starting to need to make
payments but they just weren't being
reported. Um so that's basically a long
period of time where people just got
used to not having to make that payment.
And also a very substantial part of
student loan borrowers who never had
ever made a payment because they you
know they finished their their studies
or they you know um in a period when
there was forbearance um and so what
then happened was they started trickling
back onto the credit file sort of
midFebruary of this year. Um, and then I
think you got the first batch really
kind of come in by May. And at that
point you saw that the delinquency rates
on the student loans that were not in
deferment was over 20%. So they were
over double what the historical norm
was.
>> Since then,
>> is that the highest level ever?
>> It is the highest level that we've seen
going back a long long time. So remember
there's been a lot of changes when it
was not federally mandated and privately
owned. So I I don't have visibility
going back as that far, but at least in
recent history, it's absolutely the
highest by a very substantial amount.
Um, and that's not too surprising. Um,
but one of the things that we've seen is
that we expected that there would be
some people who go into delinquency not
because they intended to, right? And so
there were may some people who they
moved and they didn't get their
addresses or a lot of people that were
confused because there were so many
mixed messages like we're going to be
forgiven but they were not and we're on
a certain program but now that program
doesn't exist anymore. So, you know,
some people have been able to then
address that and so it's come down to
this sort of 17 17 and a half% which is
a good sign. Um um and so that's
improving, but there still are people
who are on programs that have um that
have been uh killed like the the save
program. And so they are going to next
year have to either get onto another
forbearance program or start making
payments. And so it's maybe we haven't
seen the full effect then basically of
the resumption of student loans. We s
we've seen the biggest batch come
through, but there still are some more
um cohorts of consumer borrowers um that
will either have their existing program
expire um or that aren't being reported
yet because um the servicesers are
trying to figure out exactly what's
going on before they report it to the
credit bureau. So, there still is a
little bit of lack of visibility there
from on the credit serer side.
>> Ricard, thank you so much for coming on
OddLos. That was great.
>> Thank you. It's been a pleasure.
>> Thank you so much.
>> Tracy, it always comes back to
insurance, doesn't it? That's always
like the thing that is uh the little fly
in the ointment is, you know, you buy
this car and it's like, okay, here's the
car and here's the interest payment. Oh,
I think I we can make the math work. But
you can't control what that insurance
payment is going to be. You you have no
idea what it's going to be.
>> This is my theory. Insurers secretly run
the world. Run the world. They really
do. Um, you know, the other thing I was
thinking, and we've written about this
in the newsletter, but one of the
difficulties of our current economic
moment, is there is so much division and
difference built into the aggregate. If
you're just looking at a single number,
a total, like if you looked at the
average FICO score of an American, it
tells you almost nothing now because the
the individuals are so disparit.
>> Yeah. And it really does come down to,
you know, wealth, right? And there's
this this is what wealth is just such an
important factor in the economy. We
always talk about income and income
inequality and of course that's a real
phenomenon but wealth is such an
important predictor of driver of
anything. And it also goes to show like
how important like financial markets and
asset prices are to the real economy.
And it gives me once again an
opportunity to say the stock market is
the economy because we live in such a
wealth driven economy. You know, someone
once wrote into me, I wrote something
about pressures on lower income people,
and someone wrote into me saying, "Well,
why don't the lower income people own
more assets?" If they did, they'd be in
a better position. [laughter]
>> Have you tried not being poor?
>> Why haven't you tried just being rich?
Why haven't you tried buying Nvidia 20
years ago? Why haven't you tried buying
a house in California in 2009 after the
bus? It's that simple. Stop being poor.
Seriously. The other thing I was
thinking just on auto delinquencies. I
also think the trade down story is a big
piece here, which is I mean a car from
10 years ago now is pretty decent. And I
say that as someone who owns I think
it's a a Toyota Rav from like 2011 or
something like that. Like it's pretty
dependable and I don't really feel the
need to get like a fancy new car. And I
imagine if you're under pressure on your
car loan, it's probably like not that
difficult necessarily to find an older
car that is somewhat reliable.
>> I don't know.
>> You know, the one thing though, so I
have a car um that I bought in 2015.
>> It runs uh perfectly well. I would not
be surprised if it like no issues at
all. It doesn't have CarPlay
integration. Oh yeah. The one difference
between older cars and newer cars is
that it's very nice like having that No,
that that interface where you have like
a nice
>> You got a little speaker or something.
>> Yeah, but what it doesn't have is that
like really nice interface with the map
like and I know that's minor, but it's
like kind of
>> But do you have a map?
>> It has a really It has um uh it's a
Subaru uh for those curious. Uh and it's
like, you know, it's like their
in-house. It's a crappy map. It's not
the really nice like Google Maps where
it's like really clear and it doesn't
have turnbyturn navigation. I know this
sounds like kind of minor, but it is
very annoying. And like when I am in a
car that has like a modern I'm going off
a little tangent here, but when I when I
am in a car that has like a really nice
interface with uh uh a nice Google Maps
or Apple Maps and the Spotify
integration, it's very nice. And
apparently we've taken it to the dealer.
They just cannot It is unupgradable.
Yeah, it's unupgradeable. There's no,
for some reason, there is no way to put
in a new dash.
>> Oh, sorry. I thought you meant
unupgradable in terms of trading it in
for No, it's unupgradeable. It's like we
cannot like this. We could never install
CarPlay or whatever in this car. It's
the only husband and I rented one of
those like big fancy trucks, pickup
trucks, and I was amazed by the
amenities that are actually in there.
Um, including like the heated seats,
personalized heating.
>> I have a heated seat. Yeah,
>> that's fancy.
>> You know, it is very nice in the winter.
Hey, heated seats.
>> If we just talk about cars for a while
longer,
>> but the thing is like even for a car
like that, I just I cannot imagine
spending like $100,000.
>> No,
>> plus whatever the interest rate actually
is on something like that.
>> I remember that um meme from like 2010
was like no one will ever default on
that was a big thing. The and the phone,
right? the two things that people always
find a way to make a payment for the car
and the phone. I forgot
>> right which is why I think you have to
look at something structural that's
shifted and I suspect maybe it's the
availability of you know lots of older
cars but
>> just um just one last point it's I
thought it was very interesting Ricardo
is saying it's like there's no obvious
catalyst for class cataclysm there's not
obvious like oh here is something we are
on the verge of consumer credit collapse
but it is a story of just like steadily
building pressure such that If there is
some sort of spark or something, there
is a lot of stress. Not to, you know,
the resumption of student loans after
five years, the fact that the total loan
price of the car has gotten so high
relative to people's income, all of
these different things. So, you like
have all these upward stresses on
prices, you have all of this reliance
obviously on accumulated wealth, most
notably stock market and home equity. So
you have a lot of things come together
that not necessarily disaster or
anything like that, but the the the
alignment of pressures is there where
things could potentially get bad,
>> right? The consumer is much more fragile
than they used to be
>> and they might have been a few years
ago. Yeah.
>> All right. Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> Okay. This has been another episode of
the All Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway. You can follow me at Tracy
Aloway.
>> And I'm Jill Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Arman,
Dashelb Bennett at Dashbot, and Kale
Brooks at Kellbrooks.
>> And if you want more Odd Thoughts
content, you should definitely check out
our daily newsletter that is at
bloomberg.com/odotss.
>> And you can join fellow listeners in
conversation. Talk to them about the
economy 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlots.
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please like or leave a comment or
better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.
>> [music]
[music]